In common usage, climate change describes global warming—the ongoing increase in global average temperature—and its effects on Earth's climate system. Climate change in a broader sense also includes previous long-term changes to Earth's climate. The current rise in global average temperature is primarily caused by humans burning fossil fuels. Fossil fuel use, deforestation, and some agricultural and industrial practices add to greenhouse gases, notably carbon dioxide and methane. Greenhouse gases absorb some of the heat that the Earth radiates after it warms from sunlight. Larger amounts of these gases trap more heat in Earth's lower atmosphere, causing global warming.

Climate change has an increasingly large impact on the environment. Deserts are expanding, while heat waves and wildfires are becoming more common. Amplified warming in the Arctic has contributed to thawing permafrost, retreat of glaciers and sea ice decline. Higher temperatures are also causing more intense storms, droughts, and other weather extremes. Rapid environmental change in mountains, coral reefs, and the Arctic is forcing many species to relocate or become extinct. Even if efforts to minimise future warming are successful, some effects will continue for centuries. These include ocean heating, ocean acidification and sea level rise.

Climate change threatens people with increased flooding, extreme heat, increased food and water scarcity, more disease, and economic loss. Human migration and conflict can also be a result. The World Health Organization (WHO) calls climate change the greatest threat to global health in the 21st century. Societies and ecosystems will experience more severe risks without action to limit warming. Adapting to climate change through efforts like flood control measures or drought-resistant crops partially reduces climate change risks, although some limits to adaptation have already been reached. Poorer communities are responsible for a small share of global emissions, yet have the least ability to adapt and are most vulnerable to climate change.

Global warming is the rise in temperature of the air and oceans globally. It is happening mainly because humans burn coal, oil, and natural gas; and cut down forests. Average temperatures today are about 1 °C (1.8 °F) higher than before people started burning a lot of coal around 1750. In some parts of the world it is less, and in some, more. Most climate scientists say that by the year 2100, temperatures will be 2 °C (3.6 °F) to 4 °C (7.2 °F) higher than they were before 1750.

First of all, it is worth remembering that the Earth's temperature has always been changing. It has been warmer than now, and it has been much colder than now. So to talk about global warning we mean it in comparison with its temperature fairly recently, certainly in comparison with the 19th or 20th century.

Global warming is a significant and rapidly accelerating issue caused by human activities, such as greenhouse gas emissions, deforestation, and the burning of fossil fuels. It is having a profound impact on the environment and our planet. The present global warming is mostly because of people burning things, like gasoline for cars and natural gas to keep houses warm. But the heat from the burning itself only makes the world a tiny bit warmer: it is the carbon dioxide from the burning which is the biggest part of the problem. Among greenhouse gases, the increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is the main cause of global warming. Svante Arrhenius predicted this more than a hundred years ago. Arrhenius confirmed the work of Joseph Fourier 200 years ago.

As the Earth's surface temperature becomes hotter the sea level rises. This is partly because water over 4 °C (39 °F) expands when it gets warmer. It is also partly because warm temperatures make glaciers and ice caps melt. The sea level rise causes coastal areas to flood. Weather patterns, including where and how much rain or snow there is, are changing. Deserts will probably get bigger. Colder areas will warm up faster than warm areas. Strong storms may become more likely and farming may not make as much food. These changes will not be the same everywhere.

In the Paris Agreement almost all governments agreed to keep temperature rise below 2 °C (3.6 °F), but current plans are not enough to limit global warming that much. People in government and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) are talking about global warming. But governments, companies, and other people do not agree on what to do about it. Some things that could reduce warming are to burn less fossil fuels, grow more trees, eat less meat, and put some carbon dioxide back in the ground. People could adapt to some temperature change. A few people think nothing should change.

